Add tidb_super_read_only (#9718)
pingcap/docs: system-variables.md

### tidb_restricted_read_only <span class="version-mark">New in v5.2.0</span>

> **Warning:**
>

> > Prior to v5.3.1/v5.4.1, there was a serious bug with this variable. Please only use this variable with v5.3.1/v5.4.1 and later.

Author: Ok

- Scope: GLOBAL
- Persists to cluster: Yes
- Type: Boolean
- Default value: `OFF`

> - `tidb_restricted_read_only` and [`tidb_super_read_only`](#tidb_super_read_only-new-in-v531) behave similarly. In most cases, you should use [`tidb_super_read_only`](#tidb_super_read_only-new-in-v531).

Reviewer: can we move the description of "`tidb_restricted_read_only` affects [`tidb_super_read_only`](#tidb_super_read_only-new-in-v531) in some cases:"  below "In most cases, you should use [`tidb_super_read_only`](#tidb_super_read_only-new-in-v531)."?

Author: I’d rather not.

> - `tidb_restricted_read_only` and [`tidb_super_read_only`](#tidb_super_read_only-new-in-v531) behave similarly. In most cases, you should use [`tidb_super_read_only`](#tidb_super_read_only-new-in-v531).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `tidb_restricted_read_only` and [`tidb_super_read_only`](#tidb_super_read_only-new-in-v531) behave similarly. If you are a DBaaS provider of TiDB, you can use `tidb_restricted_read_only` and let your customers use [`tidb_super_read_only`](#tidb_super_read_only-new-in-v531). Otherwise, you can use [`tidb_super_read_only`](#tidb_super_read_only-new-in-v531) only.
```

### tidb_restricted_read_only <span class="version-mark">New in v5.2.0</span>

> **Warning:**
>

> > Prior to v5.3.1/v5.4.1, there was a serious bug with this variable. Please use this variable in and after v5.3.1/v5.4.1.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Prior to v5.3.1/v5.4.1, there was a serious bug with this variable. Please only use this variable with v5.3.1/v5.4.1 and later.
```

- Persists to cluster: Yes
- Type: Boolean
- Default value: `OFF`
- `tidb_restricted_read_only` and [`tidb_super_read_only`](#tidb_super_read_only-new-in-v531) behave similarly. In most cases, you should use [`tidb_super_read_only`].(#tidb_super_read_only-new-in-v531) only.
- Users with the `SUPER` or `SYSTEM_VARIABLES_ADMIN` privilege can modify this variable. However, if the [Security Enhanced Mode](#tidb_enable_enhanced_security) is enabled, the additional `RESTRICTED_VARIABLES_ADMIN` privilege is required to read or modify this variable.

> - `tidb_restricted_read_only` affects [`tidb_super_read_only`](#tidb_super_read_only-new-in-v531) in some cases:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `tidb_restricted_read_only` affects [`tidb_super_read_only`](#tidb_super_read_only-new-in-v531) in the following cases:
```

    - Setting `tidb_restricted_read_only` to `ON` will update [`tidb_super_read_only`](#tidb_super_read_only-new-in-v531) to `ON`.
    - Setting `tidb_restricted_read_only` to `OFF` leaves [`tidb_super_read_only`](#tidb_super_read_only-new-in-v531) unchanged.
    - If `tidb_restricted_read_only` is `ON`, [`tidb_super_read_only`](#tidb_super_read_only-new-in-v531) cannot be set to `OFF`.

> - For DBaaS provider of TiDB, when a TiDB cluster is downstream of another database, you might need to use `tidb_restricted_read_only` with [Security Enhanced Mode](#tidb_enable_enhanced_security) enabled to make the cluster read-only and prevent your customers from using [`tidb_super_read_only`](#tidb_super_read_only-new-in-v531) to make the cluster writable. You can enable [Security Enhanced Mode](#tidb_enable_enhanced_security), use a admin user with `SYSTEM_VARIABLES_ADMIN` and `RESTRICTED_VARIABLES_ADMIN` privileges to toggle `tidb_restricted_read_only`, and let database user to use root user with `SUPER` privilege and only be able to toggle [`tidb_super_read_only`](#tidb_super_read_only-new-in-v531).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-  For DBaaS providers of TiDB, if a TiDB cluster is your downstream database of another database, to make the TiDB cluster read-only, you might need to use `tidb_restricted_read_only` with [Security Enhanced Mode](#tidb_enable_enhanced_security) enabled, which prevents your customers from using [`tidb_super_read_only`](#tidb_super_read_only-new-in-v531) to make the cluster writable. To achieve this, you need to enable [Security Enhanced Mode](#tidb_enable_enhanced_security), use an admin user with the `SYSTEM_VARIABLES_ADMIN` and `RESTRICTED_VARIABLES_ADMIN` privileges to control `tidb_restricted_read_only`, and let your database users use the root user with the `SUPER` privilege to control [`tidb_super_read_only`](#tidb_super_read_only-new-in-v531) only.
```

> -  For DBaaS providers of TiDB, if a TiDB cluster is a downstream database of another database, to make the TiDB cluster read-only, you might need to use `tidb_restricted_read_only` with [Security Enhanced Mode](#tidb_enable_enhanced_security) enabled, which prevents your customers from using [`tidb_super_read_only`](#tidb_super_read_only-new-in-v531) to make the cluster writable. To achieve this, you need to enable [Security Enhanced Mode](#tidb_enable_enhanced_security), use an admin user with the `SYSTEM_VARIABLES_ADMIN` and `RESTRICTED_VARIABLES_ADMIN` privileges to control `tidb_restricted_read_only`, and let your database users use the root user with the `SUPER` privilege to control [`tidb_super_read_only`](#tidb_super_read_only-new-in-v531) only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For DBaaS providers of TiDB, if a TiDB cluster is a downstream database of another database, to make the TiDB cluster read-only, you might need to use `tidb_restricted_read_only` with [Security Enhanced Mode](#tidb_enable_enhanced_security) enabled, which prevents your customers from using [`tidb_super_read_only`](#tidb_super_read_only-new-in-v531) to make the cluster writable. To achieve this, you need to enable [Security Enhanced Mode](#tidb_enable_enhanced_security), use an admin user with the `SYSTEM_VARIABLES_ADMIN` and `RESTRICTED_VARIABLES_ADMIN` privileges to control `tidb_restricted_read_only`, and let your database users use the root user with the `SUPER` privilege to control [`tidb_super_read_only`](#tidb_super_read_only-new-in-v531) only.
```

- This variable controls the read-only status of the entire cluster. When the variable is `ON`, all TiDB servers in the entire cluster are in the read-only mode. In this case, TiDB only executes the statements that do not modify data, such as `SELECT`, `USE`, and `SHOW`. For other statements such as `INSERT` and `UPDATE`, TiDB rejects executing those statements in the read-only mode.
- Enabling the read-only mode using this variable only ensures that the entire cluster finally enters the read-only status. If you have changed the value of this variable in a TiDB cluster but the change has not yet propagated to other TiDB servers, the un-updated TiDB servers are still **not** in the read-only mode.

> - TiDB checks the read-only flag before SQL statements are executed. Since v6.2.0, the flag is also checked before SQL statements are committed. This helps prevent a case where long running [auto commit](/transaction-overview.md#autocommit) statements could modify data after the server has been placed in read-only mode.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- TiDB checks the read-only flag before SQL statements are executed. Since v6.2.0, the flag is also checked before SQL statements are committed. This helps prevent the case where long-running [auto commit](/transaction-overview.md#autocommit) statements might modify data after the server has been placed in read-only mode.
```

> - TiDB checks the read-only flag before SQL statements are executed. Since v6.2.0, the flag is also checked before SQL statements are committed. This helps prevent a case where long running [auto commit](/transaction-overview.md#autocommit) statements could modify data after the server has been placed in read-only mode.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- TiDB checks the read-only flag before SQL statements are executed. Since v6.2.0, the flag is also checked before SQL statements are committed. This helps prevent the case where long-running [auto commit](/transaction-overview.md#autocommit) statements might modify data after the server has been placed in read-only mode.
```

> - TiDB checks the read-only flag before SQL statements are executed. Since v6.2.0, the flag is also checked before SQL statements are committed. This helps prevent a case where long running [auto commit](#/transaction-overview.md#autocommit) statements could modify data after the server has been placed in read-only mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- TiDB checks the read-only flag before SQL statements are executed. Since v6.2.0, the flag is also checked before SQL statements are committed. This helps prevent a case where long running [auto commit](/transaction-overview.md#autocommit) statements could modify data after the server has been placed in read-only mode.
```

    - For uncommitted read-only transactions, you can commit the transactions normally.
    - For uncommitted transactions that are not read-only, SQL statements that perform write operations in these transactions are rejected.
    - For uncommitted read-only transactions with modified data, the commit of these transactions is rejected.
- `tidb_restricted_read_only` affects [`tidb_super_read_only`](#tidb_super_read_only-new-in-v531) in some cases:
    - Setting `tidb_restricted_read_only` to `ON` will let [`tidb_super_read_only`](#tidb_super_read_only-new-in-v531) to `ON`.
    - Setting `tidb_restricted_read_only` to `OFF` leaves [`tidb_super_read_only`](#tidb_super_read_only-new-in-v531) unchanged.
    - If `tidb_restricted_read_only` is `ON`, [`tidb_super_read_only`](#tidb_super_read_only-new-in-v531) cannot be set to `OFF`.
- After the read-only mode is enabled, all users (including the users with the `SUPER` privilege) cannot execute the SQL statements that might write data unless the user is explicitly granted the `RESTRICTED_REPLICA_WRITER_ADMIN` privilege.

> - Users with `SUPER` or `SYSTEM_VARIABLES_ADMIN` privilege can modify this variable. However, if the [security enhanced mode](#tidb_enable_enhanced_security) is enabled, the additional `RESTRICTED_VARIABLES_ADMIN` privilege is required to read or modify this variable.

Reviewer 4: Technically LGTM. But I'm still concerned: The difference between these 2 variables is the privilege control part, but the user might take some effort to find the difference. As a reference, I took 3 minutes to figure out the intention of making 2 variables. Should we highlight the difference?

Reviewer 5: Yes please. Even a simple sentence like "It is recommended to use `tidb_super_read_only` instead of `tidb_restricted_read_only `."

In my use-case, we are not sure which one to use. I think it is tidb_super_read_only, but I'm not entirely sure.

Author: I've added some descriptions for either `tidb_super_read_only` or `tidb_restricted_read_only`. PTAL again, Thank you.

> - Users with `SUPER` or `SYSTEM_VARIABLES_ADMIN` privileges can modify this variable. However, if the [security enhanced mode](#tidb_enable_enhanced_security) is enabled, the additional privilege `RESTRICTED_VARIABLES_ADMIN` is required to read or modify this variable.

Author: ```suggestion
- Users with `SUPER` or `SYSTEM_VARIABLES_ADMIN` privileges can modify this variable. However, if the [security enhanced mode](#tidb_enable_enhanced_security) is enabled, the additional `RESTRICTED_VARIABLES_ADMIN` privilege is required to read or modify this variable.
```

> - Users with `SUPER` or `SYSTEM_VARIABLES_ADMIN` privileges can modify this variable. However, if the [security enhanced mode](#tidb_enable_enhanced_security) is enabled, the additional `RESTRICTED_VARIABLES_ADMIN` privilege is required to read or modify this variable.

Author: ```suggestion
- Users with `SUPER` or `SYSTEM_VARIABLES_ADMIN` privilege can modify this variable. However, if the [security enhanced mode](#tidb_enable_enhanced_security) is enabled, the additional `RESTRICTED_VARIABLES_ADMIN` privilege is required to read or modify this variable.
```

> - Users with `SUPER` or `SYSTEM_VARIABLES_ADMIN` privileges can modify this variable. However, if the [security enhanced mode](#tidb_enable_enhanced_security) is enabled, the addtional privilge `RESTRICTED_VARIABLES_ADMIN` privilege is required to read or modify this variable.

Author: ```suggestion
- Users with `SUPER` or `SYSTEM_VARIABLES_ADMIN` privileges can modify this variable. However, if the [security enhanced mode](#tidb_enable_enhanced_security) is enabled, the additional privilege `RESTRICTED_VARIABLES_ADMIN` is required to read or modify this variable.
```

- Range: `[0, 9223372036854775807]`
- This variable is used to limit the maximum number of requests TiDB can send to TiKV at the same time. 0 means no limit.

### tidb_super_read_only <span class="version-mark">New in v5.3.1</span>

- Scope: GLOBAL
- Persists to cluster: Yes
- Type: Boolean
- Default value: `OFF`

> - `tidb_super_read_only` aims to be implemented as a replacement of the MySQL variable `super_read_only`. However, because TiDB is a distributed database, `tidb_super_read_only` does not make the database read-only immediately after execution, but eventually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `tidb_super_read_only` aims to be implemented as an equivalent of the MySQL variable `super_read_only`. However, because TiDB is a distributed database, `tidb_super_read_only` does not make the database read-only immediately after execution, but eventually.
```

Author: replacement is better

- Users with the `SUPER` or `SYSTEM_VARIABLES_ADMIN` privilege can modify this variable.
- This variable controls the read-only status of the entire cluster. When the variable is `ON`, all TiDB servers in the entire cluster are in the read-only mode. In this case, TiDB only executes the statements that do not modify data, such as `SELECT`, `USE`, and `SHOW`. For other statements such as `INSERT` and `UPDATE`, TiDB rejects executing those statements in the read-only mode.
- Enabling the read-only mode using this variable only ensures that the entire cluster finally enters the read-only status. If you have changed the value of this variable in a TiDB cluster but the change has not yet propagated to other TiDB servers, the un-updated TiDB servers are still **not** in the read-only mode.

> - TiDB checks the read-only flag before SQL statements are executed. Since v6.2.0, the flag is also checked before SQL statements are committed. This helps prevent a case where long running [auto commit](/transaction-overview.md#autocommit) statements could modify data after the server has been placed in read-only mode.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- TiDB checks the read-only flag before SQL statements are executed. Since v6.2.0, the flag is also checked before SQL statements are committed. This helps prevent the case where long-running [auto commit](/transaction-overview.md#autocommit) statements might modify data after the server has been placed in read-only mode.
```

> - TiDB checks the read-only flag before SQL statements are executed. Since v6.2.0, the flag is also checked before SQL statements are committed. This helps prevent a case where long running [auto commit](#/transaction-overview.md#autocommit) statements could modify data after the server has been placed in read-only mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- TiDB checks the read-only flag before SQL statements are executed. Since v6.2.0, the flag is also checked before SQL statements are committed. This helps prevent a case where long running [auto commit](/transaction-overview.md#autocommit) statements could modify data after the server has been placed in read-only mode.
```

- Enabling the read-only mode using this variable only ensures that the entire cluster finally enters the read-only status. If you have changed the value of this variable in a TiDB cluster but the change has not yet propagated to other TiDB servers, the un-updated TiDB servers are still **not** in the read-only mode.
- TiDB checks the read-only flag before SQL statements are executed. Since v6.2.0, the flag is also checked before SQL statements are committed. This helps prevent a case where long running [auto commit](#/transaction-overview.md#autocommit) statements could modify data after the server has been placed in read-only mode.
- When this variable is enabled, TiDB handles the uncommitted transactions in the following ways:
    - For uncommitted read-only transactions, you can commit the transactions normally.
    - For uncommitted transactions that are not read-only, SQL statements that perform write operations in these transactions are rejected.
    - For uncommitted read-only transactions with modified data, the commit of these transactions is rejected.

> - [`tidb_restricted_read_only`](#tidb_restricted_read_only-new-in-v520) affects `tidb_super_read_only` in some cases:
>     - Setting [`tidb_restricted_read_only`](#tidb_restricted_read_only-new-in-v520) to `ON` will update `tidb_super_read_only` to `ON`.
>     - Setting [`tidb_restricted_read_only`](#tidb_restricted_read_only-new-in-v520) to `OFF` leaves `tidb_super_read_only` unchanged.
>     - If [`tidb_restricted_read_only`](#tidb_restricted_read_only-new-in-v520) is `ON`, `tidb_super_read_only` cannot be set to `OFF`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When the [`tidb_restricted_read_only`](#tidb_restricted_read_only-new-in-v520) system variable is set to `ON`, `tidb_super_read_only` is affected by [`tidb_restricted_read_only`](#tidb_restricted_read_only-new-in-v520) in some cases. For detailed impact, see the description of [`tidb_restricted_read_only`](#tidb_restricted_read_only-new-in-v520).
```

- When this variable is enabled, TiDB handles the uncommitted transactions in the following ways:
    - For uncommitted read-only transactions, you can commit the transactions normally.
    - For uncommitted transactions that are not read-only, SQL statements that perform write operations in these transactions are rejected.
    - For uncommitted read-only transactions with modified data, the commit of these transactions is rejected.
- [`tidb_restricted_read_only`](#tidb_restricted_read_only-new-in-v520) affects `tidb_super_read_only` in some cases:
    - Setting [`tidb_restricted_read_only`](#tidb_restricted_read_only-new-in-v520) to `ON` will let `tidb_super_read_only` to `ON`.
    - Setting [`tidb_restricted_read_only`](#tidb_restricted_read_only-new-in-v520) to `OFF` leaves `tidb_super_read_only` unchanged.
    - If [`tidb_restricted_read_only`](#tidb_restricted_read_only-new-in-v520) is `ON`, `tidb_super_read_only` cannot be set to `OFF`.
- After the read-only mode is enabled, all users (including the users with the `SUPER` privilege) cannot execute the SQL statements that might write data unless the user is explicitly granted the `RESTRICTED_REPLICA_WRITER_ADMIN` privilege.

> - Users with `SUPER` or `SYSTEM_VARIABLES_ADMIN` privileges can modify this variable.

Author: ```suggestion
- Users with `SUPER` or `SYSTEM_VARIABLES_ADMIN` privilege can modify this variable.
```

- Range: `[0, 9223372036854775807]`
- This variable is used to limit the maximum number of requests TiDB can send to TiKV at the same time. 0 means no limit.

### tidb_super_read_only <span class="version-mark">New in v5.3.1</span>

> **Warning:**
>
> Prior to v5.3.1/v5.4.1, there was a serious bug with this variable. Please use this variable in and after v5.3.1/v5.4.1.

- Scope: GLOBAL
- Persists to cluster: Yes
- Type: Boolean
- Default value: `OFF`
- This variable controls the read-only status of the entire cluster. When the variable is `ON`, all TiDB servers in the entire cluster are in the read-only mode. In this case, TiDB only executes the statements that do not modify data, such as `SELECT`, `USE`, and `SHOW`. For other statements such as `INSERT` and `UPDATE`, TiDB rejects executing those statements in the read-only mode.
- Enabling the read-only mode using this variable only ensures that the entire cluster finally enters the read-only status. If you have changed the value of this variable in a TiDB cluster but the change has not yet propagated to other TiDB servers, the un-updated TiDB servers are still **not** in the read-only mode.

> - When this variable is enabled, the SQL statements being executed are not affected. TiDB only performs the read-only check for the SQL statements **to be** executed.

Reviewer 5: This part is no longer true. See https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/35487

```suggestion
- TiDB checks the read-only flag before SQL statements are executed. Since v6.2.0, the flag is again checked before SQL statements are committed. This helps prevent a case where long running auto_commit statements could modify data after the server has been placed in read-only mode.
```

- Range: `[0, 9223372036854775807]`
- This variable is used to limit the maximum number of requests TiDB can send to TiKV at the same time. 0 means no limit.

### tidb_super_read_only <span class="version-mark">New in v5.3.1</span>

> **Warning:**
>

> > Prior to v5.3.1/v5.4.1, there was a serious bug with this variable. Please only use this variable with v5.3.1/v5.4.1 and later.

Author: Yes

- Type: Boolean
- Default value: `OFF`
- `tidb_super_read_only` and [`tidb_restricted_read_only`](#tidb_restricted_read_only-new-in-v520) behave similarly. In most cases, you should use `tidb_super_read_only`.
- `tidb_super_read_only` aims to be implemented as a replacement of the MySQL variable `super_read_only`. However, because TiDB is a distributed database, `tidb_super_read_only` does not make the database read-only immediately after execution, but eventually.
- This variable controls the read-only status of the entire cluster. When the variable is `ON`, all TiDB servers in the entire cluster are in the read-only mode. In this case, TiDB only executes the statements that do not modify data, such as `SELECT`, `USE`, and `SHOW`. For other statements such as `INSERT` and `UPDATE`, TiDB rejects executing those statements in the read-only mode.
- Enabling the read-only mode using this variable only ensures that the entire cluster finally enters the read-only status. If you have changed the value of this variable in a TiDB cluster but the change has not yet propagated to other TiDB servers, the un-updated TiDB servers are still **not** in the read-only mode.

> - TiDB checks the read-only flag before SQL statements are executed. Since v6.2.0, the flag is also checked before SQL statements are committed. This helps prevent a case where long running auto_commit statements could modify data after the server has been placed in read-only mode.

Author: ```suggestion
- TiDB checks the read-only flag before SQL statements are executed. Since v6.2.0, the flag is also checked before SQL statements are committed. This helps prevent a case where long running [auto commit](#/transaction-overview.md#autocommit) statements could modify data after the server has been placed in read-only mode.
```

- When this variable is enabled, TiDB handles the uncommitted transactions in the following ways:
    - For uncommitted read-only transactions, you can commit the transactions normally.
    - For uncommitted transactions that are not read-only, SQL statements that perform write operations in these transactions are rejected.
    - For uncommitted read-only transactions with modified data, the commit of these transactions is rejected.
- [`tidb_restricted_read_only`](#tidb_restricted_read_only-new-in-v520) affects `tidb_super_read_only` in some cases:
    - Setting [`tidb_restricted_read_only`](#tidb_restricted_read_only-new-in-v520) to `ON` will let `tidb_super_read_only` to `ON`.
    - Setting [`tidb_restricted_read_only`](#tidb_restricted_read_only-new-in-v520) to `OFF` leaves `tidb_super_read_only` unchanged.
    - If [`tidb_restricted_read_only`](#tidb_restricted_read_only-new-in-v520) is `ON`, `tidb_super_read_only` cannot be set to `OFF`.
- After the read-only mode is enabled, all users (including the users with the `SUPER` privilege) cannot execute the SQL statements that might write data unless the user is explicitly granted the `RESTRICTED_REPLICA_WRITER_ADMIN` privilege.

> - Users with `SUPER` or `SYSTEM_VARIABLES_ADMIN` privilege can modify this variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Users with the `SUPER` or `SYSTEM_VARIABLES_ADMIN` privilege can modify this variable.
```
